# A Proposed System

As I refine what is in my head and on my personal files, I will share more. I would love for FROSTT RPG to be the work of all various people coming to a mutually agreed upon system. But I also recognize that 1. group work needs a starting point 2. I have ideas for a system that I would love to share with the world, and 3. it’s likely impossible to make a “mutually designed system” from the ground up.

So, in an attempt to seed the creative discovery process and let the community play around with ideas I’ve had for a while, I’m going to propose a beginning for what FROSTT could become. And if I’m the only one working on this it will probably continue down that path, though I’d love to see others help guide it to something even better. But recognize that this is just an idea which can and probably should change. There’s all types of questions around balance, scaling, and playability. These are things that will only be accomplished with more people than me having input, so please do share your thoughts.

### The Foundation

The foundation of FROSTT is attempting to make something new and different from what we know, which uses the fewest mechanics and “level tables” to provide the most structure and breadth of direction. It may not actually accomplish this, but you will likely see that core desire in some of the decisions made here. I will try and quickly explain the system here, and then go into specific detail in dedicated pages.

### The 8 Capacities

This may not be as important to the mechanical design of the system but it will help with creating the frame for the rest of this document. In this system I am hoping to stick with 8 capacities, each having unique representation of a character’s interactions with the world. Some may look similar, but I think the additions bring meaningful value. 

—********Mental/Spiritual—********

************Piety:************ (Starting with the most distinct) this is a measure of connection to the supernatural

****************************************Connection:**************************************** A measure of connection to the natural order of things and intrinsic existential energy

********Influence:******** The degree to which one can change the consideration and order of other beings 

********************Cognizance:******************** Grasp of and ability to change the order of one’s own mind and extract complexities

—****************Physiological—****************

**Agility:** Simply ones capacity to move quickly and deftly

**Build:** One’s brawn & strength as well as some forms of momentum

**Awareness:** The whole of one’s senses and keenness to use them to capture information

**Fortitude:** How long you can go doing something physical or taking physical punishment 

### Dice As Capacity

We are familiar with damage using various combinations of dice to provide the breadth of hurt against someone’s HP. A weapon may do 1d12 or 2d6, a spell may be 20d4 or 8d10. As a spell becomes more powerful you may add a die for every level. 

What if this same use of various dice were applied to, what I call, characters’ “capacities” (paralleled with 5e abilities). Instead of using a base (d20) die and some modifiers to resolve a situation, what if there were no static modifiers and players just rolled a collection of dice. There are some advantages to this (and some hurdles) but we won’t cover those here. Key is that a player’s capacity is measured in dice. To compare (though the scales are different) in 5e a player may have a +5 to Strength which is added to a d20 they roll for a check. In FROSTT, they may have 4d6 where the average person has 2d4. As a player improves, instead of adding static modifiers, they add and upgrade dice. 

These rolls are what I call “active capacity”, how much of something you can do when you are actively trying. But, by using various dice, we can also come up with passive capacities. In things like 5e a passive capacity may be “number of spells able to be prepared at once”. These are often done in tables. In FROSTT, with dice providing active capacity, what if we also used them to structure passive capacity. As a possibility, if a wizard has 2d8 Cognizance capacity, that would mean she can keep prepared 16 spells. Furthermore, you may be able to restrict what level of spell they can keep prepared by requiring the spell’s association with a “die slot” equal or higher than its level (a d8 can only “hold” one 8th level spell, and 7 lower spells), this likely requires a bit more delineation. 

### Character Builds & Balancing Features/abilities Through Capacity

The hope is that by using this type of “die slots” for various “abilities”(not to be confused ability scores in 5e etc.) system, game builders can have more options to provide interesting new play. Flight is an interesting example. Sometimes presented as a hard ability to offer players in a campaign, we may be able to give limitations for it by using capacity slots like described above. If flight is a “level 6” movement ability available to a given lineage, when rolling for movement (something that may itself seem foreign) they would need to roll a total of 6 to use their flight ability. We could also tie the flight distance to the level of the flight. It is likely more acceptable to give a 10ft(5ft vertical) flight to a player, so this may be a “level 1” movement which the player must store on their level 1 Agility slot. This likely requires more discussion, but the idea here is that capacity can be used as a means of allowing for interesting narrative and character creation, while restricting game breaking.

Another important part of the intent behind this system is that it is easy to create customizations. This means that from the beginning I’d love to create a “feature buy” type system for everything starting with lineages and going through subclasses (if they exist). This is both intended to provide balance in published and homebrew creations alike, as well as provide creative guidelines that generate new ideas for lineages and classes. For instance, right now the idea is to have lineages designed by first trading physiological traits (only) to enhance one base capacity and diminish another, then “buying” three features such as a heightened sense (including dark vision), a resistance, a protective feature like natural weapons or armor, etc. If this base approach is used for creating a default set of lineages, it can also be used by designers & even players to make unique creatures we’ve never even thought of.  

Beyond that, though it’s tempting to create a bunch of unique and interesting base character build options, these complicate the game for players coming in. As we make default lineage & class options the decisions should be fairly approachable so that players can get started, get comfortable, and then get complicated later on by choosing unique features along the way that fit their play. As such I’m considering getting rid of subclasses all together. What initially seems like a simplification of decisions becomes, to some players, an endless slog through various subclasses to decide their class, because once they go down that path, they “can’t go back”. It may be better to have a few more classes (which may look a bit like subclasses at times) to choose from, but then the rest is up to them as they get playing. If we think a player could benefit from a more “railroaded” character building experience, this system should make it easy for a DM to hand them something narratively interesting that the player can run with.

Finally, to touch on classes & capacity. The core idea for classes is that they are distinctly tied to one or two capacities and have unique command over those capacities which others do not (instead of just using them as the base for casting modifiers etc.). At present a “specialist” class would only be tied to one capacity but get to use that capacity more broadly. A fun example is the concept of a “sharpshooter” who’s specialty is awareness. This individual may be able to use awareness instead of Agility/Build to make certain attacks. These specialists will also likely get a higher “capacity max” than otherwise allowed (say for instance the max is 24, a specialist may get 36). The other type of class is a “mixer”(working name) class, which combines two different capacities in unique ways. An Outlander for instance could be Awareness + Agility, being able to add awareness to certain agility rolls (including attacks) but isn’t specialized enough in either to get an increase in that capacity. However, this is balanced out by the ability to “roll together” which in some situations provides more total capacity.

Of course, who knows how well this will work with things like multi-classing (if that even needs to be a thing), or if it scales right as players level. These are all just preliminary thoughts, but the goal is to have a system that is flexible & customizable in a way that designers can take the core concepts and expand. 

### A Different Type Of Combat

As part of this re-imagination of capacity a new form of initiative and combat came into view. We must come up with a way to form initiative, or get rid of it all together. I opted for the latter, at least in part. Instead, the thought would be to have round by round initiative built into characters’ action rolls. These action rolls? Are a limited combination of capacity dice a player chooses to use from their pools of capacity. If I’m casting a spell I’m pulling from my spell casting capacity pool, if I’m doing extra movement, I’m pulling from my movement capacity pool, and I can do various combinations of these that will be explained (and refined). In current consideration is a player having a total of 4 dice worth of “round capacity” which fuels their actions and initiative (at higher levels various options open up for potentially using more dice but let’s keep it simple for now). Whether those are 4d12 or 1d4 +3d6 depends on the actions they think they want to take, and the power of their various capacity dice they seek to roll. This creates a more dynamic combat (where a player may get a bad initiative roll one round but make it up in the next), as well as offers the option for (but doesn’t inherently require if you want simpler play) an “initiative economy” where you may choose to “trade dice” between rounds. An interesting prospect which requires more investigation. 

As it is, when combat is engaged, all involved characters decide the general sets of capacities they want to use for actions and roll their “round capacity” with one or more of the associated dice (up to 4 total). From highest to lowest total roll, each player in turn chooses to take their action(s). A player may take an action for each of their dice, or choose to combine dice to make a more powerful action. For instance, I may roll a 1 and a 2 on my intended attack dice for that round. Neither may hit separately, but together I may get just enough to do what I want. Or, I may want to cast a spell that requires a roll of 6 or higher, so I combine my 3 2s into the one big spell I want to cast (say I rolled the 4th die as some movement or a dodge). If you aren’t totally taken aback by the concept of not having a fixed action/bonus action, you may have moved on to wondering what actions you can take (you probably also play more RPGs than just 5e). We can talk more about specific actions later, and it’s likely what you expect but with a more active dodge & block action, however the intent here is instead to provide a base of understanding for the different and flexible mechanic intended for this system. What is unique about this type of “round capacity” model is that it is adjustable by designers who are looking for different feels. Though it may require some additional balancing, I have the feeling the system is more suited to account for scaling.

### Finally

There’s a lot more that could be said here, my brain has been going over this stuff since the OGL leak. However, this is the beginnings of a system that may be a good starting point for building FROSTT_RPG… it may also be crap in practice. That’s why I’d love to have others asking questions and creating their own original ideas around a new, open, TTRPG system we can all share. Thanks for your time and any feedback you give. If you are interested in the prospects of designing this system, please let me know. We are at the beginning of a new age for TTRPGs and I am excited to see what the community comes up with, even as corporations are trying to get their cut of the action (not saying I hate corporations, I’d love for some to share their time and money to make something like this become more of a reality… as long as it is the community’s in the end).
